# Abstract Algebra 2024 Spring Midterm
## General Informations
- **Date**: 2024-04-22.
- **Time**: 13:30 - 16:30.
- **Closed book.**
- **Total points:** 100. 10 pts for each question, and 0 pts for bonus question.

**Problem 1.** Let $\sigma, \tau, \gamma$ be elements of $S_{13}$ given by
$$
\sigma = (1\ 4\ 6\ 8\ 10)(2\ 5)(3\ 6)(11\ 7\ 9),
\\ \tau = (1\ 8)(2\ 3\ 6),
\\ \gamma = (2\ 4)(3\ 9).
$$
Compute $|\sigma|$, $\sigma^3$, $\sigma^{-1}\tau$, and $\langle \tau\gamma \rangle$.

**Problem 2.** Let $G$ be a group and $N$ be a normal subgroup of $G$. Prove that for an arbitrary subgroup $H$ of $G$, $N \cap H$ is normal in $H$.

**Problem 3.** Let $G$ be a group and $H$ be a subgroup of index $p$ where $p$ is a prime. Prove that for any subgroup $K$ of $G$, at least one of the following holds: $\textrm{(i)}$ $K \leq H$; $\textrm{(ii)}$ $KH = G$ and $[K : K \cap H] = p$.

**Problem4.** Let $p < q < r$ be distinct primes. Prove that any group of order $pqr$ is solvable and has a normal Sylow $r$-subgroup.

**Problem5.** Let $p$ be a prime and $G_p$ be an infinite group such that any non-trivial subgroup of it has order $p$. Such groups are known as Tarski monster groups.

$\textrm{(a)}$ Prove that any element of $G_p$, except for the identity, has order $p$.

$\textrm{(b)}$ Prove that $G_p$ is simple.

$\textrm{(c)}$ Prove that $G_p$ can be generated by two elements.

**Problem6.** Let $G$ be a group and $H$ a subgroup of it with $[G : H] = 4$. It is known that for any normal subgroup $K$ of $G$ that is contained in $H$ with $[H : K] \leq 100$, the quotient group $H/K$ is never cyclic. Prove that there is some normal subgroup $P$ of $G$ contained in $H$ such that $G/P \cong S_4$.

**Problem 7.** Prove that there are exactly four homomorphisms from $\mathbb{Z}_2$ to $\operatorname{Aut}(\mathbb{Z}_8)$, and find one $\theta$ among them so that $\mathbb{Z}_8 \rtimes_\theta \mathbb{Z}_2 \cong D_{16}$.

**Problem 8.** **This problem does not require detailed reasons for answers.**

Let the quasi-dihedral group of order $16$, $QD_{16}$, be defined by
$$
\langle \sigma, \tau \mid \sigma^8 = \tau^2 = \mathrm{id},\ \sigma\tau = \tau\sigma^3 \rangle.
$$
The following is a lattice of it. (I do not have the figure. It may be updated in future versions.)

$\textrm{(a)}$ Fill in the blanks in the lattice, for each of which you should provide no more than 2 elements that generate the corresponding subgroup.

$\textrm{(b)}$ Draw a lattice for $QD_{16}/\langle \sigma^4 \rangle$ and use it to explicitly construct an isomorphism $QD_{16}/\langle \sigma^4 \rangle \cong D_8$.

**Problem 9.** This problem tries to apply group theory to combinatorics.

$\textrm{(a)}$ Let $G$ be a finite group such that every non-identity element has order $2$. Prove that the order of $G$ is a power of $2$. (Partial marks may be awarded for those who successfully prove this result for Abelian groups, which is sufficient for the following part of this problem.)

$\textrm{(b)}$ There are $n$ mathematicians attending a meeting. Some of them are friends while some are not. The organisers would like to divide the mathematicians into 2 dining halls, and each mathematician would like to have an even number of friends in his/her dining hall. Prove that the number of ways to divide these mathematicians into 2 dining halls is either $0$ or a power of $2$.

**Problem 10.** It is well known that conjugacy classes of $S_n$ are determined by the lengths of the cycles formed. In this problem we work out the conjugacy classes of $A_n$. Let $K$ be a conjugacy class in $S_n$ whose elements are all in $A_n$.

$\textrm{(a)}$ Find out all conjugacy classes in $A_4$.

$\textrm{(b)}$ Prove that if an element of $K$ consists of cycles of distinct odd lengths then $K$ is not a conjugacy class in $A_n$.

$\textrm{(c)}$ In contrast to (b), prove that if an element of $K$ contains a cycle of even length or two cycles of the same odd length, then $K$ is a conjugacy class in $A_n$.